Book: Confessions of a Public Speaker by Scott Berkun
date: 2011-02-13
blurb: Excellent. A must-read if you want to improve your public speaking.
categories: book, review, speaking

Scott Berkun is a former software engineer now earning his money as
author and public speaker. This is an interesting career, and in this
book Berkun tells the story of how he got into public speaking and
what he picked up on the long road of mastering this skill.

[Confessions]() is a book on public speaking, but not in a reference
or text book kind of way. In the author's own words, it's "highly
personal and opinionated".

Berkun mostly builds the chapters around personal stories,
experiences--good and bad--he had when speaking, and the lessons
learned from these experiences. While there are also plenty of
literature references to back up some statements, the meat of the book
is in this personal approach to public speaking. And indeed, after
reading this book one gets the impression that this approach is
essential, because in the end successful public speaking is defined by
the degree to which the speaker emotionally captures the
audience. Beyond listing tricks and guidelines to slide design,
although he touches on these subjects, Berkun focuses on capturing the
audience.

Below you'll find notes and brief summaries I made for most of the
chapters. If you're interested in the subject or if you simply need to
present once in a while, I strongly recommend reading the book.

With *I Can't See You Naked*, Berkun starts off with a chapter to put
you at ease: no one cares as much as you when things go wrong. People
care and remember when it went right. It's a long learning process to
become good at presenting, and Berkun remarks "if you'd like to be
good at something, the first thing to go out the window is the notion
of perfection". Perfection stops you from learning and taking
chances. Be yourself and be useful, with the mistakes you make.
  
*The Attack Of The Butterflies* deals with being afraid of the
stage. Being nervous when facing a crowd is built in to humans through
evolution and there's nothing you can do about that.  But fear is also
good because it focuses attention. All interesting things in life come
with fears: asking the cute girl for a date, applying for a job,
writing a novel.

So what to do to make that fear manageable and even useful? Practice a
lot. By actually standing up and imagining a crowd and
presenting. Apart from improving the presentation, it makes you
comfortable and alerts to potential problems. Also, on the day of the
talk, arrive early and get accustomed to the room and the tech.

The chapter *$30,000 an hour* explains the lecture circuit and the
economics of public speaking. Since it's not a goal of mine to earn
money by speaking, it wasn't that relevant to me, but has some
interesting information. There's a list of exemplary fees for a
one-hour lecture, topped by Bill Clinton at $150,000+.

*How To Work A Tough Room* is actually about the room! berkun says its
importance is vastly underestimated and calls for more real theaters.
He presents his density theory: that not the absolute size of the
crowd matters, but its density. Facing a mostly empty room, do what
you can to make them come forward. Offer rewards!

*Do Not Eat The Microphone*, is titled after the expression meaning
the moment when the audience's confidence in having its needs met is
lost, and people stop listening. How to avoid that? Berkun says,
besides following the more technical basics of good presentations, the
key is in thinking your talk through thoroughly. "All good public
speaking is based on good private thinking". Berkun fights the myth of
spontaneous inspiration--good public speeches are the product of lots
of work and practice.
 
Of course you also need to get your deep thoughts across. Prepare
doing four things: 1. take a strong position in the title, 2. think
carefully about your audience, 3. make your points as concise as
possible, and 4. know likely counterarguments.

*The Science Of Not Boring People* goes deeper into some techniques to
ensure keeping the audience with you. This highly useful chapter
covers pacing and rhythm, story telling, involving the audience, and
other subjects.  .

At some point you'll have given a few presentations, and like in every
other field, [feedback is the key to improve](/2011-02-06_review
talent is overrated.html). Berkun gives tips on what questions to ask
your audience as well as on practicing by yourself at home.

*The Clutch Is Your Friend* gives extra advice for lectures where the
goal is to actually teach the audience something, as opposed to, for
instance, merely giving an overview of a topic or a motivational
speech. The alternate title is "why Teaching Is Almost Impossible"--in
Berkun's view, given the difficulties in teaching a large group of
people effectively, you can only prepare and follow a few simple rules
and hope for the best. The rules: small numbers win, make it active
and interesting, and start with an insight that interests the
students.

With *Confessions*, a great and funny chapter ends the book: Berkun
confesses some tricks he uses and some thoughts going through his mind
frequently when speaking. You learn that everything is allowed as long
as you capture your audience, and after all, "the easiest way to be
interesting is to be honest". If you want to know if Berkun wears
underwear when giving a talk, read this chapter.

The book has several useful appendixes with concise extra information,
such as How To Make A Point. Also, the references are great. To keep
in mind: Donald A. Bligh, *What's the Use of Lectures*, and Ken Bain,
*What the Best College Teachers Do*

As I said before, a great book, recommended without hesitation.
