Book: Talent is Overrated by Geoff Colvin
date: 2011-02-06
blurb: Fascinating and important. How top performers really get to be so great. Don't let a false notion of innate talent stop you.
categories: Books, Personal Development


Geoff Colvin's
[Talent is Overrated](http://www.amazon.com/Talent-Overrated-Separates-World-Class-Performers/dp/1591842948/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1297014218&sr=8-1)
opens with presenting new research findings showing that top
performers do not have "innate gifts". Instead, their achievements are
the result of lots of *deliberate practice*. The author backs this
claim with different research findings and exemplary biographies, then
explains the nature of great performance and the kind of practice
necessary to achieve it, concluding with a chapter on motivation and
passion.

I liked this book so much that I took extensive notes, which you find
below. Here's the summary: I think it is an important work that might
change the way you think about personal and professional
development. From practice design to motivation and passion and the
nature of great performance, Colvin covers the subject from all angles
and backs his findings with lots of references.


Talent doesn't exist? Really?
-----------------------------

This is hard to believe when thinking of such prodigies as Einstein,
Mozart, or Michael Jordan. Colvin knows this and goes to great lengths
to present these studies and explain how, in his view, these top
performers really got to be so good. He walks the reader through the
childhoods of Mozart and Tiger Woods, and it's indeed surprising what
we find here: an extreme practice regime starting at two years of age,
designed by an expert in the field, and tens of thousands of hours of
practice before both appeared in the public as masters of their
field. Whether they have/had innate talent or not, their success
certainly didn't come easily. The author also presents a study showing
that while chess masters are incredibly good at remembering chess
boards, this only holds for boards with real, valid
positions. Presented with boards breaking the rules of chess, they do
no better than amateurs. Their memory must therefore be the result of
the years of chess training.

Colvin further points out the incredible progress that has occurred
across the board in the last hundred years even though our genes
didn't change in such a short time. A 1908 Olympics record is today's
top high school level.

Concluding his introduction, Colvin points out what an influence on
our lives the belief in innate talent has. Parents and teachers direct
kids to follow a course where they think they might have
talent. People themselves limit themselves and skip opportunities in
the belief to lack the necessary talent to go beyond the average.


Deliberate Practice
-------------------

So what is this deliberate practice that leads to outstanding results,
while most people work for years without seeing much improvement? It
is designed, it can be (and is!) repeated a lot, it allows continuous
feedback, it is mentally highly demanding, and finally, it is not
fun--otherwise, quips Colvin, everyone would do it. If they knew how
to design such practice, that is.

The abovementioned attributes of deliberate practice show that it is
nothing like the actual work one is practicing for. This explains why
working in a job even for decades does not necessarily produce
masters.

It is not quite clear whether a top performer can design her own
practice, or if she needs a coach who is an expert in training design
and can judge objectively. Tiger Woods, for instance, is still taking
lessons, while the Comedian Chris Rock designs and practices his
routines by himself.

A pretty incredible story concludes this part of the book. Among the
first thinking about the design of a training regime to produce
world-class results was the Hungarian psychologist Laszlo Polgar. He
went all the way and found, via a newspaper add, a woman willing to
have children with him to raise in a way carefully designed to make
them word-class chess players. Surprisingly enough, he found one and
they had three girls--all of whom became grand masters after a
childhood of rigorous training.

Can we pin down a general effect of deliberate practice? What does it
do that other kinds of practice don't do? For Colvin, it's avoiding
automaticity. The brain tends to automate repeated activities to save
mental energy. This automation stops improvement. It also makes one
vulnerable to distractions because they break the pattern triggering
the automated routine. Instead, top performers remain conscious of
their activity throughout their training.


How deliberate practice works
-----------------------------

For Colvin, "perceiving more" is the key: more indicators, further
ahead, with less information. His chess example of the Big Blue
vs. Kasparov is a little doubtful, I felt he didn't make clear the
difference in reasoning between the human player thinking in patterns
and the computer evaluating a large number of positions in advance.

Colving also points out here that knowledge plays an important
role. Experts have more and it's better consolidated. Jeff Immelt,
then head of GE, launched a study showing that among his managers,
domain knowledge beat general management knowledge. This is old news
for developers suffering under non-technical IT management, so it's
good that a business author like Colvin, who writes for Fortune in his
day job, points that out. The consolidation of knowledge affects
memory, too. No one can hold more than nine items in their mind
simultaneously (for most people it's seven items), but the items can
be bigger. A chess amateur might remember a single position, while a
master remembers a whole board.


Applying the principles in our own lives
-------------------------------------------

The author distinguishes three models of practice depending on the
kind of task to be practiced.

The music model: You know what you want to convey, like classical
music is written down, and one needs to convey it effectively. One can
break the task down into pieces and practice them independently, with
immediate feedback either by a coach or on video. A good addition is
to watch top performers and analyze what they are doing well, then
compare one's own performance to theirs, repeating the process over
and over.

The chess model, known as the "case method" in the business world:
like chess players study individual moves from recorded games, one
studies lots of example problems. Ideally there is a known, but yet
hidden, solution, so that after deciding on an action, one can compare
one's own choice with the known one, like a chess student would study
a master's game. Of course, for practical problems it's often not
clear what the solution is, if it even exists--it helps to discuss
with coaches and peers in that case.

The sports model: Sports is different from classical music in that no
two situations are ever exactly alike. One practices by working on
basic conditioning and skill development. Basic conditioning in sports
is strength and endurance training, and working on cognitive skills,
math and basic science in intellectual fields of work. Skill
development means practicing certain situations repeatedly, such as
sales calls.

Having this basic framework for thinking about practice, we need to
look at the practice itself. Colvin highlights three points that many
do not follow in their practice. First, there needs to be a clear goal
of what one wants to achieve, and what steps exactly will be necessary
to get there. Second, metacognition during training is crucial:
observing oneself to get a correct assessment of one's mental
processes. Third, get as much specific feedback as possible and
analyze it.


Innovation and creativity
-------------------------

The combined impact of the internet and globalization leads to a
massive commoditization. To thrive in this environment, creativity and
innovation are key. Can we apply the principles of great performance
here?

Colvin doesn't believe that creative works are the result of a flash
of insight. The evidence is conflicting. Colvin presents some
fascinating work of Dean Keith Simonton, John Hayes (CMU), and Howard
Gardner ("Creative Minds"). The summary is that "great innovators are
nourished by knowledge"; innovation grows from the past.


Great performance in youth and age
----------------------------------

In this chapter, Colvin first examines what kinds of homes are
conducive for kids to achieving top performance, then looks into
maintaining top performance in old age.

This chapter didn't work as well for me as the others. His opening
teaser of the average age of Nobel prize winners now being six years
older than 100 years ago seems obvious: as science advances, things
get more and more complex, requiring more study to understand what's
been done before.

Colvin's findings on the right kind of environment for children are
mainly based on Benjamin Bloom's research, and seem plausible, but
remain too general. The environment must be child-oriented and
supportive. A strong work ethic based on the goals of excelling and
spending one's time constructively is necessary.


Where does the passion come from?
---------------------------------

The final chapter addresses the deepest question the book asks: why do
all that hard practice? Who does it and why, and why don't the others
do the same?

Colvin first reviews the research on motivation, which agrees that
intrinsic beats extrinsic motivation by far. But how is intrinsic
motivation linked to deliberate practice? Possibly through *flow*. To
experience flow, the difficulty level needs to be just
right. Repeating the same task or practice too often makes it too
easy, so top performers could be driven to setting the bar higher and
higher to keep the flow experience.  This I found very insightful and
exciting, since Csikszentmihalyi's book
[Flow](http://www.amazon.com/Flow-Psychology-Experience-Mihaly-Csikszentmihalyi/dp/0061339202/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1297013636&sr=8-1)
is next on my reading list.

However, it doesn't explain why people put themselves through the
grueling practice required for the very top, including lots of
failure. The author leaves this point open, saying that we simply
don't understand fully what's behind motivation and passion. He adds
an interesting observation, though: examining the childhood
experiences of many top athletes, he found that their passion for
their sport wasn't there from the start. It only developed after a few
years of practice, once they started to become really good.
